These sharks hold their breath to stay warm in frigid waters - Science News, 11 May 2023

Plummeting to ocean depths of 800 meters or more, scalloped hammerhead sharks forage and feast on delicacies such as deep-sea squid. These frigid waters¡ªas chilly as 5¡ãC¡ªshould be perilous for the cold-blooded sharks that dwell in the tropics. Yet, the predators swoop down multiple times a night, raiding their ocean-floor fridge for snacks without issue.

The trick may be holding their breath, researchers report today in Science. Scalloped hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna lewini) close their gills and their mouths as they dive, the team believes. The maneuver shuts off their oxygen intake, but also prevents their body heat from escaping into the ocean.

If the discovery bears out, ¡°it would be a new [technique] that has not previously been described to maintain body temperature,¡± says Julia Spaet, an ecologist at the University of Cambridge who was not involved with the work.

Some deep-sea fish, such as tuna and lamnid sharks, a family of large and speedy sharks, are partially warm blooded; they can divert body heat to specific organs even in icy temps. But the scalloped hammerhead¡ªone of the larger hammerhead species, named for its rippled crown¡ªhas no such plumbing. Every time it dives deep, its environment chills more than 20¡ãC, like a human jumping into a glacial stream on a summer day. Such an extreme temperature drop¡ªespecially for an animal that can¡¯t warm itself¡ªshould weaken the shark¡¯s eyesight and brain function. It could even prove fatal, causing the predator¡¯s muscles to seize up, preventing it from moving forward and pushing oxygenated water into its gills.

To figure out how these sharks keep themselves toasty, Mark Royer, a marine biologist at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, and his colleagues attached a bundle of sensors to the animals off the coast of Hawaiian island Oahu. These included an accelerometer, which functions like ¡°a Fitbit for the shark,¡± Royer explains, and tracks movement, vigor of tail beats, and body orientation. The bundle also logs depth and water temperature, as well as the shark¡¯s internal body temperature.

The sharks swam with this sensor pack for 23 days, after which it detached and bobbed up to the surface of the ocean, where it pinged its location to scientists. Clambering onto a boat, the team jetted off in the direction of the sensors, scanning the waves for the soda can¨Csize bundle.

The data were surprising. The sharks maintained their body temperature within 0.1¡ãC for the entirety of their dive and most of their way back up to the surface. In the final 300 meters of their ascent, the sharks¡¯ body temperature dipped about a mere 2¡ãC.

The strongest explanation is that the sharks were closing their gills and mouths and freediving to the ocean floor, the team concludes. This strategy would allow them to stay warm as they hunted for food. The dip in temperature during the final part of the ascent was likely due to the sharks opening their gills to breathe again as they neared comfortable surface waters. In total, sharks held their breath an average of 17 minutes per dive.

The study makes the scalloped hammerhead shark the first deep-diving fish known to hold its breath, Royer says. It¡¯s ¡°astounding and a completely unexpected surprise.¡± The meal at the bottom must be scrumptious, Royer notes, or else the energy expenditure involved wouldn¡¯t be worth it.

Spaet is intrigued, but she¡¯d like to see more proof. Video footage of the sharks¡¯ gill and mouth closing during dives, she says, would hammer home the breath-holding theory.

Going forward, Royer says, the team hopes to examine the sharks¡¯ metabolism to suss out how they¡¯re able to perform their deepwater dives. The findings, he says, underscore that there are ¡°a lot of extraordinary [things] hidden from us.¡±